# Incident: 2025-12-02 09-39-00 MST

## Summary

Between 9:39am and 10:12am on December 2nd, 2025, all users were rendered unable to purchase pizzas due to an inability to post their order to the Pizza Factory. This event was triggered by a change in the Order Fulfillment code at 9:39, causing all orders to fail at the factory regardless of quantity. 

The event was detected by human reaction and observation at approximately 9:56. Investigation into cause and resolution solutions began immediately, starting with why automatic detection did not kick in before final resolution at 10:12am. This SEV-1 incident affected 100% of users.

## Detection

The on-shift team noticed at 9:56am a spike in warning level logs around 9:50am, prompting concerned curiosity, followed by an acknowledgement that Pizza Fulfillment and Revenue Rates had both fallen to 0 at 9:39am. Human error had paused all monitoring alert services and neglected to re-enable them prior to the incident, delaying the time between incident occurance and initial acknowledgement by nearly 20 minutes, and confusion over the lack of alerts delayed resolution by a further 10 or so minutes. Moving forward, it will be made absolutely mandatory that all alert systems remain functional at all times, and that any disablement must be immediately re-enabled ASAP to remove the approximately 30 minutes spent not resolving the incident. In addition, future resolutions will start with addressing the problem, then observability issues.

## Impact

For 33 minutes between 9:39am MST and 10:12 MST on 12/2/25, 100% of users lost the ability to fulfill pizza orders, causing loss of revenue to company and potential loss of customers as the site maintained an average traffic of 1-2 active users every 15 secs for the duration.

## Timeline

Due to lack of alert monitoring during the incident, the automatic history that would have been created by Grafana's OnCall and Alert Groups is unavailable. The provided timeline is rough at best.

All Times are MST

12/1/25
- _17:15_ - Abnormal alerts trigger, Team member pauses Grafana Alerts while issue is investigated. Alerts are not re-enabled due to Human Error.
- _17:35_ - ChaosMonkey Engaged, Alerts still not re-enabled.

12/2/15
- _9:28_ - Active Team Member ceases active human monitoring of system.
- _9:39_ - Incident occurs. Alerts are still paused, so no issues are reported
- _9:56_ - Active Team Member returns to station, notices abnormal amount of warning logs on timeline.
- _9:57_ - Order Fulfillment issue acknowledged, tested by Team Member to confirm. investigation started into lack of alerts, as all systems report green.
- _10:07_ - Alerts are re-enabled, Team Member shifts attention to Log investigation to identify issue
- _10:12_ - Resolution implemented following investigation of failed order response bodies. 
- _10:15_ - Team Member confirms order fulfillment functionality is restored, and Chaos Monkey at factory is calm again.

## Response

Brayden Walker, the active Team Member, was primary responder to the incident. He came online at 9:56, returning to his station after a 45 minute absence and noticing an abnormality in the log visualizations some 5 minutes previous, followed by an acknowledement of flatlining in Pizza Fulfillment and Revenue visualizations. Of most critical note, all alert systems were accidently made inactive while Team Member was away from his station. As such, initial response focused on investigating the lack of alerts. Upon realizing their inactivity, they were re-enabled before team member turned attention to the incident itself. Actual time spent on resolving the issue totaled to about 5 minutes, despite time from Team Member activation to incident resolution being 16 minutes. 

## Root cause

ChaosMonkey induced disablement of order fulfilment. Any and all POST requests to the pizza factory immediately failed with a 500 error. 

## Resolution

Examining the error logs of the the failed 500 level error POST requests, the following instruction was found in the response body: {"message":"Failed to fulfill order at factory","followLinkToEndChaos":"Link"}. Following the link restored POST request functionality and ended Chaos State. Time to resolve would have been greatly reduced if the Team Member had focused on resolving the issue first instead of investigating the lack of alerts made. 

## Prevention

The only other similar incident is a hard-coded rejection of an order numbering 20 or more pizzas. This incident reduced this state to any pizza was rejected period. At its root, though, this was a ChaosMonkey induced Error. Number 1 prevention would include assurance that all alerting services are indeed active at any given time.

## Action items

1. Institute system of checks that ensure alerts are active at all times and especially when there is no active human observer of the system.
2. Any alert made inactive during maintenance must immediately be reactivated upon task completion.
3. Introduce a check that upon repeated order failure, disables accesss to the ordering system with message of ongoing error/maintenance to prevent further customer induced errors during incident timeframe. 
